Welcome back to the fast neutron, in todays video, we are going to introduce the concept of cross
sections, which will help us understand how we quantify the ways in which particles interact with
matter.

Our last video discussed neutron scattering, and we talked through some of the formulas which govern
how neutrons transfer energy when they collide with nuclei. Besides scattering, there are quite a
few other interactions that neutrons and other particles can undergo, so a natural next step is to
think through radiation interactions with matter at a higher level.

We will start off by introducing cross sections at a conceptual level, and then use them to
build a framework for modeling radiation attenuation. From there, we will introduce quantities like
flux and fluence, and we will wrap things up with some cool plots of cross sections varying with
particle energy - which will be crucial to understand before we get into reactor theory.

All of the calculations that wedid in the last video assumed up front that a scattering event had
taken place, but we know for afact that neutrons and other forms of radiation can penetrate all
kinds of materials - so particles aren't gaurenteed to interact with nuclei in their vicinity.

Let's begin our dicussion by thinking through how we can characterize the likelihood with which an
interaction will occur. The quantity which describes this is called a cross section. Here's a little
thought experiment to get things started.

Imagine we have a beam of neutrons firing from left to right. Unencumbered, these neutrons will fly
off to infinity. Now lets put an obstacle in their way - in this case it is a sheet of material only
one atom thick, and these atoms are gaurenteed to absorb any neutrons that collide with them. How
can we go about determining the probability that a neutron from our beam is absorbed the sheet?

An intuitive way to go about this would be to take a look at the sheet head-on. Notice that the
nuclei of the atoms take up a good chunk of the sheet's area, but there are still some gaps left
over. If we imagine our neutron beam is firing neutrons at the sheet with random positions, it
stands to reason that the probability of a neutron being absorbed is equal to the fraction of the
sheet's area taken up by the nuclei.

Let's come up with a formula for this. We will represent the area of the sheet with A, and the area
of a single nuclide with little sigma. The probability of our neutron being absorbed is therefore
just the number of nuclei times little sigma divided by the area of the sheet!

To formalize how we can calculate the number of nuclei in the sheet, we can write it as the density
of atoms within the sheet (which we will write as big N with units of atoms per volume) times the
sheet's volume, which will be A times the thickness of the sheet "Delta x". Cancelling out A shows
us that the probability of absorption is equal to the atom density of the sheet material, times the
area of an individual atom in the sheet, times the thickness of the sheet. This makes sense, as we
would expect the probability of absorption to go up if the sheet was made of a more dense material,
if the atoms were larger, or if the sheet itself was thicker.

Little sigma (the area of an individual atom) is what is called the "microscopic cross section" of
our sheet's material. "Cross section" here really is an intuitive name, since we definied this
quantity as the cross-sectional area of an atom when we look at it head-on. Because we are talking
about individual atoms here, conventional units like a square centimeter would be pretty clunky - so
instead we typically use units of "barns", where one barn is equal to 10^-24 cm^2. This tiny unit of
area is a lot more convienent to use for an individual atom. The name "barn" actually comes from the
Manhattan project, where physicists opinied that Uranium was "as big as a barn" from the perspective
of neutrons.

Now I should really point out that the microscopic cross section is a bit of an abstraction. It is
less the true area of a particle or atom, and more an "effective area". Most atomic nuclei have
radii of around 10^-15 meters, so we would expect for most cross sections to be on the order of
one barn or less. However when we measure cross sections, we often see values much larger or
smaller than one barn. Since we are down at the atomic or subatomic scale, we are working with
objects best described by quantum mechanics. These aren't hard-bodied entities colliding like
billiard balls, they have wavelike properties and there are energy levels to contend with - so
things are a little more complicated than that. The microscopic cross section is instead just the
area which produces behavior that matches what we would expect to see if our projectiles were
pointlike particles flying at a sheet of material like in the previous example.

When we multiply a material's atom density by its microscopic cross section, we get a quantity
called the macroscopic cross section which we represent with big sigma. This has units of inverse
length, and it is equal to the probability of interaction per unit length of material. If you take
the macroscopic cross section of a slab and multiply it by the slab's thickness, you get the
probability of an interaction taking place in the slab for a given particle - that's just our
formula from earlier! While the microscopic cross section is a property associated with a material
itself, the macroscopic cross section is dependent on the material's density. If you divide 1 by the
macroscopic cross section, you get the average distance a particle will need to travel in a material
before an interaction occurs - this is called the "mean free path".

Before we move on, I want to quickly mention that the values of microscopic cross sections depend on
a whole host of factors. It probably comes as pretty obvious that we will have different microscopic
cross section values for different materials (they can be made up of all sorts of different isotopesp
after all), but cross section magnitudes also depend on the type of incident particle. Some
materials really like to interact with neutrons but are fairly transparent to photons and vice
versa, so that plays into things. And then the energy of the incident particle also is massively
important in determining the likelihood of interaction, along with the temperature of the material,
and the type of interaction we are interested in, and whether the material exists as a free gas or
if it is bound in a lattice and so on and so forth. So there is a lot that goes into driving the
value of little sigma. We will talk about this in more detail in just a bit, but I just wanted to
mention that up front.

Now that we have the concept of cross sections in our toolbelt, we can get on with deriving a more
general framework for radiation attenuation that will allow us to think about phenomena more
complicated that a monodirectional beam of neutrons on a one-atom-thick sheet. For instance, if we
can quantify how a stream of neutrons is absorbed by a slab of material as a function of the slab's
thickness, that would allow us to start thinking through engineering problems like designing
radiation shields.

Let's start our discussion of radiation attentuation by thinking about how the intensity of a beam
of radiation will change as it passes through material. Here, intensity is a quantity which
describes the strength of our beam as a function of the position we find ourselves in within a slab.

Whenever an interaction occurs in our slab, we would expect the intensity of the beam to decrease,
and we can write a differential equation to describe this as follows. The change in intensity over
a differential slice of our slab dI/dx will be equal to negative Sigma times the beam intensity at
that point. Remember that Sigma is the probability per length of an interaction occuring, so if we
integrate this expression from 0 to x, we will get an expression for the intensity of the beam which
has not undergone any interactions up to x. This comes out to I(x)=I(0)*e^{-Sigma x}, where I(0)
is the initial intensity of the beam at the surface of the slab.

So while the probabilty that we have an interaction here is constant from point to point, the amount
of beam which penetrates the slab up to some point x falls off exponentially. If our slab's material
changes with position so that Sigma is dependent on x, we can generalize our formula as follows.

Here is an example of how this would play out for a 2 cm thick slab from with a macroscopic cross
section of 1 inverse centimeter. The intensity of the beam prior to the slab is constant, since it
isn't interacting with anything. Then once it hits the slab we see the intensity fall exponentially.
Once the beam exists the slab, the intensity once again remains constant.

For something a little more complicated, let's take a look at a two-part slab, where the first
section from x=1 to x=2 has a macroscopic cross section of 0.3 inverse centimeters, and the second
section from x=2 to x=3 has a macroscopic cross section of 1.0 inverse centimeters. In the first
section, the beam attenuates away slowly since the probability of interaction per length is lower,
and then once we hit the second section we attenuate away more quickly. I'm sure you can see now
how this concept would be useful if we were trying to design a radiation shield. Depending on how
much we wanted to attenuate a beam away and how thick we wanted our shield to be, we could pick
materials with suitable macroscopic cross sections to accomplish our goal.

Before we move onto looking at how neutron cross sections vary with energy, I have a quick aside
I want to make. There is that there is actually more than one way in which radiation
may be attentuated. What we are showing here is called "material attenuation", which is the
reduction in radiation intensity when radiation interacts with an obstacle in its path. A second
type of attenuation is "geometric attenuation".

Instead of a monodirectional beam, imagine we had a isotropic point source of radiation. "Isotropic"
just means it is emitting particles in all directions with equal probability. You can imagine that
as we move further from the point source, the paths that the particles trace out will become more
and more spread out in space. Now the intensity quantity we were using earlier is a little
simplistic for this example, so lets introduce a new quantity called "flux". Flux is just a measure
of how many particles are passing through a location every second on a per area basis, and we
represent it with the greek letter "fee". More accurately, flux is the "path length density" with
units of per area, per time.

At a distance R away from the source, the flux will therefore be the rate at which particles are
being emitted "Q" divided by the area of a sphere with radius R. This area grows as R increases, so
flux drops off proprtional to 1 over 4 pi R squared. This reduction in flux as particle paths spread
out in space is "geometric attenuation".

If our point source was placed inside a sphere of material, all we would need to do to update our
phi formula is to add in the term from earlier which describes the material attenuation that would
occur, e^-Sigma R.

By the way, if you integrate flux over some duration - you will get the total number of particles
passing by per area per area over that time period. This quantity is called "fluence". And then if you
integrate fluence over some surface, you will get the total number of particles which hit that area during
that time period. The radiation exposure sustained by a target is a function of this quantity. This
is why in radiation safety, we consider the time someone spends by a source, the distance they are
from the source, and the shielding between them and the source. If you want to limit your exposure
to radiation, you can spend less time near a source, get further away from it, or place some shielding
between you and the source.

Alright, now we have an understanding of cross sections and how they apply to radiation attentuation,
so to close things out lets take a look at some actual cross section values!

We will start by looking at a neutron cross section for hydrogen-1, the simplest of isotopes. Earlier,
I mentioned that the value of a cross section varies depending on the specific interaction we are
talking about. Let's look at the cross section for scattering off of hydrogen-1. 

This plot doesn't really tell us all that much, its clear that at low energies the cross section is
pretty high, but for even just a single eV it seems like the cross section is basically zero, so lets
transform the x axis to a logarithmic scale.

I'm going to highlight a region in the plot which shows the cross sections when energies get down to
fractions of an eV. Neutrons with these energies are called "thermal neutrons", since they have such
low energies that they are in thermal equilibrium with the material around them. Notice that the
curve for the cross section looks like the left half of a parabola. In this region of the plot, the
cross section is proportional to one over the velocity of the neutron. This behavior is common in
many cross section profiles.

Lets transform the y axis to be logrithmic as well. Now our 1/v relationship looks like a straight
line, and we can see a little more complicated behavior. The likeihood of a scattering event
hapenning levels off until high energies in excess of 10,000 eV, at which point it starts to tail
off again.

Now lets look at something a little more interesting. Lets plot the fission cross section of the most 
common isotope of Uranium, uranium-238. Right off the bat, things are looking a little more complicated
here. At thermal energies we can still see the 1/v region that we saw with Hydrogen, but then once
we get to these intermediate energies (which are sometimes called "epithermal" energies), things
kind of go crazy. We have these steep peaks and valleys, where specific energies of neutrons are
tens of thousands of times more likely to cause fission than neutrons with just slightly different
energies.

These peaks here are called "resonances". And the reason they are there is rooted in quantum physics.
It is pretty well known that electrons exist in discrete energy levels, and the same is true for
nuclei. In fact, there is a whole model, the nuclear shell model, which predicts these energy levels.
Interactions are most likely to occur when an incoming neutron has just enough energy to cause the
product nucleus to hop up to one of those energy levels. When this is the case, we see a huge spike
in the cross section.

As we go up even higher in terms of energy, we get fast neutrons, which are indeed the namesake of
this channel! When neutrons are emitted from splitting atoms, they are up at these energies.

Finally, lets look at another isotope of uranium in order to see how cross sections can vary for
a single element based upon the number of neutrons it has. This is the fission cross section for U-235.
As we can see for thermal and epithermal energies, U235 is thousands to millions of times more likely
to undergo fission compated to U238 - which makes it really good fuel for reactors.

If you dig uranium up out of the ground, only around 0.7% of it will be U235, while the remainder
will be almost entirely U238. In order to improve the quality of the uranium we put into reactors,
uranium is typically "enriched", a process where the fraction of U235 is increased. We can also see
that for uranium 235, slow neutrons are way better at causing fission than fast neutrons. For this
reason, many reactors intentionally slow neutrons down to thermal energies so that they are more
likely to split an atom. U238 is actually more likely to be split by a fast neutron.

We wil talk more about all of this in a later video, but if you hear about "thermal spectrum" reactors
versus "fast" reactors - that is referring to the type of neutrons relied upon in those reactors
to perform the bulk of atom splitting. Depending on the energy of neutrons in a reactor, fission and
capture and absorption cross sections can significantly vary, and this leads to some pretty profound
differences in how reactors behave.

Thanks for watching! Now that we understand cross sections, we are finally ready to start introducing
reactor theory in the next video. Hope to see you there!