Welcome back to Tthe fast neutron! In today’s video, we’re finally ready to dive into the basics of
reactor theory. The understanding we have been building up on the foundations of nuclear physics is
about to start paying off as we move towards learning about some of the machines that we build to
harness the power of the atom. So if you have been following along with the past videos on this channel,
thanks! Over the next few videos, we will be bringing in plently of the concepts we have already covered
to understand the theory behind nuclear reactors.

Today, we are going to cover the absolute basics. Namely, we are going to walk through the concept
of a neutron multiplication factor, which is a quantity that we use to describe how a nuclear chain
reaction is proceeding. Then we will talk about the neutron lifecycle within reactors, which will
provide us with a really intuitive path forward for deriving a formula for the neutron multiplication
factor. Finally, we will tie each term in our formula to physical quantities associated with the
material and geometric makeup of nuclear reactors. 

To start off, I think it is worth remembering what nuclear reactor are actually supposed to do. Like
we have talked about a few times in previous videos, splitting some kinds of atoms results in the 
release of energy, which can then be used to do useful things like generate electricity. Now the
best way to split an atom is with a neuton, and some atoms release neutrons when they are split! These
two facts lead us to the obvious conclusion that if we collect a lot of these atoms in a location and
hit one with a neutron, it can split, which releases more neutrons, which can go on to split more
atoms, and we have a chain reaction!

Let's start with a little toy example. Lets say we have a special isotope which releases two
neutrons upon undergoing fission. If we split an atom of our isotope, this can lead to two more
fissions. And each of those fission can lead to two more fissions! And so on an so forth. Before we
know it, we have sixteen neutrons when we only started with one! This is an example of a chain
reaction which is increasing our neutron population over time.

This is not the only way that our chain reaction could possibly proceed, though. Imagine if instead
our isotope only produced one neutron when it split. Now our initial neutron causes fission, which
produces one neutron leading to one more fission, which produces one more neutron leading to one
more fission, and so on. Here, we still have a chain reaction, but our neutron population is remainig
constant over time.

Finally, imagine a case where our isotope only had a 50/50 chance of emitting a neutron if it split.
Here, lets start with eight neutrons splitting eight atoms. Although we split eight atoms, we only
emitted four neutrons, so the next generation of fission reactions only sees four atoms split. This
then results in two neutrons, which causes two subsequent fissions. So we started with eight neutrons,
but now we are down to just a single neutron. This is still a chain reaction, but its one which
reduces our neutron population over time.

Nuclear engineers have a quantity which we use to describe these sorts of chain reactions which
quickly tells us whether or not our reactor is currently increasing, decreasing, or maintaining its
neutron population. This quantity is called the neutron multiplication factor, and we typically
represent it with the letter k.

The formula for k can be simply written as a fraction. In the numerator of our fraction we have the
number of neutrons in our system from a generation of fissions. And in the demoninator we have the
number of neutrons in the prior neutron generation which caused the fissions that created our
current generation of neutrons!