Welcome back to the fast neutron, in todays video, we are going to introduce some of
the theory and math behind neutron scattering, one of the most important phenomena in
all of nuclear engineering.

Our last video discussed binary nuclear reactions. Some of the math that we introduced
at the end of that video will make an appearance at the start of this one, so feel free
to give the last video a watch. Today, we will start out by talking through the kinematics
of neutron scattering, and the possible energies that neutrons can take on after scattering.
From there, we will introduce a concept called neutron lethargy, which is a quantity
unique to nuclear engineering. And finally, we will show how scattering in different
materials causes different changes in neutron lethargy.

To start things off, let's bring back our formula which described the outgoing energy of
the light product from a binary nuclear reaction. The square root of the outgoing energy
of the light product is equal to A plus or minus the square root of A squared plus B, where
A and B are quantities defined in terms of the masses of the reaction participants, the
angle at which the light product leaves the reaction relative to its incident path, and the
reaction's Q-value.

Although it may seem like binary nuclear reactions always feature a change in the makeup
of the reaction participants, this doesn't actually have to be the case! Neutron scattering
is an example of a binary nuclear reaction where the reaction precursors and products are
identical to one another. We start with a neutron and a target for it to scatter off, and
we end with the neutron and the same target. Of course, there will be energy exchanged through
the scattering event itself, but we aren't producing any new particles or anything like that.

Lets label our diagram of a prototypic binary nuclear reaction to represent a neutron scattering
off of a nucleus. Our projectile particle is, of course, a neutron. And the target is the nucleus.
After the scattering, the light product is the same neutron, and the heavy product is the
same nucleus.

This lets us simplify our expressions for A and B a little bit, since the projectile and the light
product are identical, and the target and the heavy product are identical. m_n is our symbol for the
mass of a neutron, and big M is the symbol for the mass of the nucleus.

Lets plug in our new forms for A and B. We get this ugly equation, but we can do a little
simplification to get things to lookk a bit nicer. First, we can factor out a one over M + m_n from
the right hand side of the equation. and then from there we can square both sides to get an
expression for E-prime, the outgoing neutron energy. Now notice that this the variables that can
readily change in this expression for a given reaction are the angle of scattering and the reaction
Q value, everything else is just some combination of the neutron and nucleus masses. If we define a
new constant big A as the ratio of the nucleus mass to the neutron mass, we can get these mass-based
coefficients to be a little simpler. A good approximation that we can make here is that this ratio
is just the mass number of the nucleus. After all, the nucleus is made up of protons and neutrons,
which have nearly the same mass. This approximation isn't perfect, of course, since nuclear binding
factors into the mass of the nucleus through the mass defect and protons and neutrons don't have
*exactly* the same mass, but its close to being true. If we convert all of our mass values to be
in terms of the mass of a neutron, m_n goes to 1, and big M goes to A.

Now we have a formula which is a little easier to digest. It relates the energy of the neutron after
scattering to its initial energy, the angle at which it scatters, and the mass number of the
nucleus it scatters off of. Let's look at how changing the mass of the target and the angle of
scattering affects the outgoing neutron energy.

When I was studying neutron scattering in school, one thing that really helped me understand the
kinematics of this problem was my professor plotting the angle of scattering as a function of the
outgoing neutron energy, so let's do that. If we rearrange our formula to solve for the cosine of
the scattering angle, we get the following expression.

First, lets plot our curve for the case of a neutron scattering off of a proton. At the top right of
the curve, we see that the cosine of the scattering angle is 1, which means the scattering angle is
zero. Here, the post scatter energy of the neutron E-prime is equal to its incident energy, so the
neutron didnt lose any energy. This represent a scattering event where the neutron just barely
interacts with the proton, and continues on its way in the same direction that it came from. As the
scattering angle grows larger an the cosine decreases, we see that the neutron transfers more and
more energy to the proton. Finally, there is the case where E-prime is equal to zero. This
corresponds to a scattering event where the neutron transfers all of its energy to the proton and
stops dead in its tracks.

This is only possible if the neutron is scattering off of something that has the same mass as it
does, so a proton or another neutron. If the target that the neutron hits is heavier than it is,
this cannot occur, the neutron cannot physically transfer all of its energy through a scatter to the
target. If this seems weird, a good analogy is to think about billiard balls. If you are playing
pool and you hit the cue ball perfectly at another ball, the cue ball will stop in its tracks and
the other ball will go rolling away. However, if you decided to hit a cue ball at a bowling ball
sitting on the table in the exact same manner, the cue ball would transfer some of its energy to the
bowling ball, but it would bounce right back at you. Another interesting thing to note here is that
the cosine of the scattering angle cannot be negative, which means that the neutron cannot
backscatter off of a proton under any circumstance.

Lets plot this curve again, this time for a heavier target. Let's bump A from 1 - the value
corresponding to a proton - to 2. Here we can see that it is still possible for the neutron to lose
zero energy and continue on its original path, but it is not possible for it to lose all of its
energy. The lowest possible energy the neutron can leave with comes when the cosine of the
scattering angle is negative 1, which means the neutron bounces back in the opposite direction from
which it came.

We will derive an expression for this lowest possible energy in just a second, but for now let's
just say it is equal to some factor alpha time the incident energy. If we keep increasing the mass
of the target, alpha E gets closer and closer to our incident energy, meaning that the neutron is
able to transfer less and less energy through a scattering event. If the mass of the target was
infinite, this curve becomes a straight line up and down at E. This is analogous to the neutron
scattering off of an immovable point, no matter what angle it bounces away with, it will transfer
no energy at all.

Now lets quickly calculate what that minimum post scatter energy for a neutron is. We will assume
that our scatter is elastic, so the Q value is zero. For any A value greater than 1, this will occur
when a neutron perfectly backscatters, so the scattering angle is 180 degrees and the cosine of the 
scattering angle is negative 1. Plugging this value in and doing a little simplification gives a
value of A minus 1 over A plus 1 all squared, times the original incident energy. This is our alpha
term, and as A grows larger, it approaches 1.

So now we know how to calculate the final neutron energy for a given scatter, but what is the
probability that the neutron will have any one energy versus another? That is to say, what is the
probability density function which describes post-scatter energies? It's about as simple as it gets,
it is a uniform distribution. For an incident energy E, all post-scatter energies between E and
alpha E are equally likely, so the probability density funtion which describes the probability per
energy that a neutron scatters from energy E to E' (assuming the Q value is zero) can be written as
follows.

With this probablity density function we can calculate the average loss of energy for a neutron
during a scattering event. This is just equal to the initial energy minus the average post-scatter
energy. And since we have a probability density function describing post scatter energies, we can
calculate its mean value by simply integrating E times the function over the functions whole domain.

So we do a little algebra, and we end up with the result that the average loss in energy is 1/2
times the quantity (1 - alpha) times E, which is right in the middle of our uniform distribution as
expected.

OK, now that we have a good understanding of the basic math behind neutron elastic scattering, I
want to point out that a lot of our formulas are all dependent on incident energy. This makes sense,
as the amount of energy exchanged by scattering events is undoubtably a function of incident energy,
but there is a quantity that nuclear engineers use to describe how neutrons gain and lose energy
which can make some of the math to come a little bit easier.

This quantity is called "lethargy", and we represent it with the letter u. Lethargy is defined as
the matural logarithm of the ratio of some reference energy E_0 and our energy E. E_0 is typically
selected to be the maximum neutron energy that we expect to see in our system. Notice that lethargy
is dimensionless and that it actually increases in magnitude with lower energies. Here is a plot of
lethargy as a function of energy for some E_0.

This may seem like a pretty random quantity to introduce, but what is nice about lethargy is that
it sort of eliminates a lot of the pesky dependence on incident energy from the formulas that we
described previously, and makes it so that you can sort of treat every scattering event as being
equivalent. To show this, lets take a look at how changes in energy correspond to changes in
lethargy.

With a little algebra, we can show that going from E to E' results in a change in lethargy equal to
the natural log of E over E'. Recall that our minimum change in energy is when E' is equal to E.
This results in no change in lethargy. Our maximum change in energy happens when we backscatter and
go from E to alpha E. And in terms of a change lethargy, this is when lethargy increases by the
natural log of 1 over alpha. So our energy dependence has been removed! It doesn't matter if our
neutron has 10 MeV of energy or a fraction of an eV, it's maximum change in lethargy for a scatter
is the same.

Now just like we did before for energy, lets calculate the average change in lethargy for a
scattering event. We start by constructing or probability density function for lethargy as follows.
Every differential slice of our lethargy function should match that of the energy function, so we
write the following equality. And then we can calculate dE'/du' trivially since we already have
defined the function which relates energy and lethargy. Then we just plug in our energy probability
density function from earlier and we get our result.

To calculate our mean change in lethargy, we follow the same procedure as before and integrate our
lethargy pdf times u'. This can be made a little easier if we define a helper variable x as the
change in lethargy. The symbol we normally use to represent the mean change in lethargy is xi, which
is unfortunate because it is impossible to write accurately in your notes. I'll spare you a full
description of the math, but with a little help from integration by parts, we can get an answer.

The mean change in lethargy for a scattering interaction is 1 + alpha times the natural log of alpha
over 1 minus alpha. So if A is 1, xi is 1 and if A is larger than 1 xi is smaller than 1. Notice
that this value is completely independent of the inital lethargy, its just a function of the mass
number of the target.

In a very real sense, the value of xi for some material describes how effective that material is at
slowing down neutrons. The closer xi is to 1, the better the material is at quickly pulling energy
out of neutrons through scattering. Because there is no initial dependence on lethargy, we can
calculate the mean change in lethargy for N collisions by simply multiplying xi by N. This
calculation would be much more involved if we tried to calculate the mean change in energy after
N collisions without the help of lethargy.

We can sort of flip this around and find how many scatters we expect it will take for a neutron to
go from one energy to another with the formula N equals 1 over xi times the change in lethargy, or
1 over xi times the natural log of our initial energy divided by the final energy.

To wrap things up, I want to show a quick simulation which proves this out. We will do a little
Monte Carlo simulation here. We will simulate a number of neutrons which all start at 2 MeV, and we
will see how many scatters on average it will take for them to scatter down to 1 eV.

Our first example will be for A = 1. This is analogous to neutrons scattering off of protons or
hydrogen-1. For each simulation, we start with a neutron at 2 MeV, and then we will randomly sample
a new energy from the probability distribution function we saw earlier. We will then repeat this
process and record the number of scatters it takes to get our energy below 1 eV.

Here is a quick example of how that will looks in terms of the neutron's energy.

[EXPLAIN PLOT, ITS RANDOM AFTER ALL]

Now that was just a couple of cases, instead lets simulate a few thousand and see how many things
shake out. For A = 1, our alpha value is equal to zero and our average change in lethargy is defined
to be 1. So we start to perform our simulations, and we see that the average value for the number
of scatters it took to reach 1 eV was [VALUE]. If we analytically calculate the expected value with
our formula form earlier, it comes out to around 14.5. Some neutrons took only a couple of scatters
to reach 1 eV, and some took closer to 30, but on average, a neutron scattering in the best possible 
medium for slowing it down takes only around 14 scatters to reduce its energy by a factor of two
million.

Now lets up our A value to 2, so the medium our neutron is scattering in is composed of particles
twice the mass of the neutron itself. This could be something like deuterium in heavy water, which
is used to slow down neutrons in canadian reactors. Here, our alpha value is 0.11, and our average
change in lethargy per scatter is 0.73. This is less than the previous value of one, which shows
that this material will be worse at slowing down neutrons. After a bunch of simulations we see that
it takes on average [VALUE] scatters to get to 1 eV from 2 MeV, lining up with the prediction.

Finally, lets up A to 12, this could be something like carbon, which is used to slow down neutrons
in most gas-cooled reactors. Here, our alpha value rises to 0.72 and our average change in lethargy
per scatter drops to 0.16. Our simulation predicts that it takes [VALUE] scatters to reach 1 eV.

The simulations prove out that heavier materials are worse at slowing down neutrons. If you plot the
expected number of collisions needed to go from 2 MeV to 1eV as a function of big A, you can see
there is a more or less linear relationship, but the number of scatters increases pretty quickly.

For iron 54, the expected number of collisions rises to 411, and for our old friend uranium 238,
it takes on average a whopping 1731 collisions. 

For reasons we will get into in future videos, this trend has profound implications on how we pick
materials for use in different types of nuclear reactors, and the materials we pick directly impact
things like how efficient reactors are at utilizing neutrons, how long we can leave components in
our reactor cores before they need to be replaced, and whether or not we can construct reactors to do 
crazy things like produce their own fuel or take nuclear waste from other reactors and use it as
fuel. For now, I hope this video has given you a good introduction to neutron scattering and how
it impacts neutron energies.

Thanks for watching! In the next video, we are going to do a deep dive on nuclear reaction cross
sections. This will be the final stepping stone before we are ready to start introducing the basic
concepts of reactor theory. See you in the next video!

