Welcome back to The Fast Neutron! This is installment 3 in my ongoing series on the basics
of nuclear science and engineering, and its the second part of a pair of videos on nuclear
decay. Today, we are going to be going into the mathematics behind radioactive decay.

If you haven't seen the last video, I would highly recommend checking it out. We went over
the different common types of nuclear decay and discussed the kinds of isotopes that tend
to give off energetic particles these different modes. While you can certainly pick things
up from here, I think the last video should help you gain a little bit of intuition on *why*
some atoms undergo decay.

For today's video, we will start off by introducing the concepts of decay constants and half
lives. These quantities are the building blocks we will use in constructing equations that
describe how populations of radioactive isotopes change over time. After that, we will talk
through the concept of activity, as well as the units we use when talking about activity.
From there, we will do a quick section on branching ratios, which come into play when a single
isotope can decay in more than one way. Next we will solve some basic decay equations with and
without isotopic production to contend with, and then finally, we will talk through decay chains
and do a couple quick examples to show how we can predict the populations of different species
of isotopes over time. Here we will introduce concepts like the Bateman equations, transient
equilibrium, and how the matrix exponential can be used to make our lives easier in these
calculations.

To motivate our discussion here, it's good to remember the simple fact that different unstable
isotopes can and do decay at different rates. If we have a single atom of uranium-235, its likely
it stick around for the better part of a billion years before it decays via alpha emission into
thorium-231. For other isotopes like, say, chromium-47, you wouldn't have to wait more than a
half of a second before you can expect it to have undergone beta-plus decay into vanadium-47.
And there are a plethora of isotopes that last a much, much shorter amount of time than that.

The rates at which different isotopes decay span many orders of magnitude, 54 orders of magnitude
to be exact. And the quantity that underpins these rates is called the "decay constant". This
constant effectively describes the rate at which a given isotope undergoes decay. We represent
decay constants with a lowercase lambda, and decay constants have units of inverse time.

For a given isotope, the decay constant is defined as the reciprocal of the isotope's "mean
lifetime", which we represent with the greek letter tau. So an isotope with an expected lifetime
of 10 seconds will have a decay constant of 0.1 inverse seconds. And for every second that passes,
the isotope will have one in 10 chance to undergo decay.

Now a crucial point of note here is that decay constants are in fact - constant. They do not change
with time. Atoms have no memory of their state, so the probability that they undergo decay doesn't
change as time passes. Lets say our atom with a one in ten chance to decay each second has, by some
miracle, survived for a whole hour without decaying. While the probability that this atom lasted
that long is extremely slim, it still has a one in ten chance to decay in the coming second. Nuclear
decay is a purely stochastic process, you can think of unstable isotopes as constantly rolling a
many-sided dice to determine whether or not they will decay.

If you are familiar with a little bit of statistics, it has probably already dawned on you that the
rules we have laid out here for radioactive decay describe a Poisson process. As such, for a large
collection of isotopes, the Poisson distribution can be used to model the number of decay events
which can be expected to occur as a function of time.

As is the case of any Poisson process, if the number of participants in the process grows large
enough, we can use exponential decay to model how the participants change state over time. So
if we have a collection of an isotope with an initial population of N_0, the population N(t)
evolves over time through the following exponential decay relationship. This is the solution
to the following differential equation which governs how isotope populations change over time
due to decay. dN/dt = -lambda N(t).

Now, lets talk about the concept of a half life, which is definitely more widely known than that
of decay constants. Put simply, an isotope's half life is the amount of time it is expected to take
for a large collection of that isotope to fall in population to half of its original value. We
represent half life with the symbol t_1/2. The half life is directly related to the decay constant
through the following relationship, where the half life is equal to the natural logarithm of 2
divided by lambda.

To give a little bit of visual intuition here, let's draw a quick plot. On the y axis, we will have
the relative population of a sample of an unstable isotope. On the x axis, we will have time, and we
will put it in terms of the decay constant. Now from earlier, we know that the mean lifetime is equal
to one over the decay constant, so we can write the x-axis labels in terms of tau.

As we plot the curve that describes the population over time, we get the familiar shape of exponential
decay. Now the first thing I want to make clear is that the mean lifetime of an isotope is not equal
to its half life. At time 1 tau, the population hasn't been reduced by a factor of 2, but rather by a
factor of e as tau is the mean of this exponential distribution. At t equals 2 tau, the population has
reduced by a factor of e squared. And at t equals 3 tau, a factor of e cubed.

The half life is analogous to the median of this distribution, so after one half life we are left
with half of the original population, after two half lives just a quarter remains. And after three
half lives just one eighth.

A good rule of thumb to remember is that for every ten half lives that pass, the population of a
radioactive isotope will decrease by a factor of 1000. For small releases of radioactivity during,
say, an experiment in a lab. This rule of thumb can be used to quickly come up with an estimate
for when the affected area will be safe to clean.

Now let's move on from decay constants and half lives and talk about activity. Put simply, activity
is the rate at which radioactive decays are happening at some point in time. We can conceptualize
this as follows. Anytime the population of an isotope changes, a radioactive decay must have occured.
So for a collection of isotopes undergoing decay, activity - the rate at which decays are occuring,
is equal to the rate at which that population of isotopes is changing.

We can get an expression for reactivity as follows. dN/dt will be equal to negative lambda times N(t).
Therefore, activity is just lambda times N(t). The faster the population decreases, the higher activity
will be. If we sub in our expression for N(t) from earlier, we arrive at the following expression for
the activity of a single isotope decaying away. A(t)=lambda N_0 e^(-lambda t).

So for a sample of an unstable isotope, activity is directly proportional to the sample's population.
This makes sense conceptually because we would expect a larger collection of radioactive atoms to be
more, well, radioactive! Activity also grows with the decay constant, which makes sense as a larger
decay constant means that an collection of isotopes will decay away at a higher rate.

Before we move on from talking about activity, I want to quickly introduce a couple of units that we
use to describe it. As we have established, activity at its core is just a quantity which describes
a rate of decay, with dimensionality of inverse time. Because the magnitudes of activities we
encounter in the wild span many orders of magnitude, there are two commonly used units that we put
activity in terms of.

These units are the becquerel and the curie. The becquerel is the most basic unit of activity, named
for French physicist Antoine Henri Becquerel, who discovered radioactivity in conjunction with the
legendary Polish physicist and chemist Marie Curie. It is equal to one decay per second, simple as
that. So a sample of material with an activity of 1000 becquerels will have within it 1000 decays
occuring every second. In the grand scheme of things, a Bq is an extremely small unit to have much
use in the context of any real world problems, the miniscule amount of Americium-241 in household
smoke detectors has an activity of about 37,000 Bq. So we frequently discuss activities in terms of the
units SI multiples, kBq, MBq, GBq, and so on.

We frequently describe larger activities in terms of curies, named, of course, after Marie Curie.
One curie is equal to 3.7e10 Bq, or 37 billion decays per second. This is roughly the activity of
one gram of radium. Modern measurements put the actual specific activity of radium-226 closer to
3.66e10 Bq/g, but by the time this was discovered, the unit had already been defined.

Before we move onto solving decay equations, I want to quickly talk about branching ratios. Many
isotopes are capable of undergoing more than one mode of decay. These different decay modes can and
will occur at different rates, and so they have different decay constants. Just as an example, any
isotope that can undergo beta plus decay can also decay through electron capture. And in heavier
isotopes, electron capture often occurs at a greater rate than beta plus decay.

The overall decay constant can be calculated as the sum of the individual decay constants which
correspond to each unique decay mode. If we divide both sides of this equation by the overall
decay constant, we get an the following expression. Each of the terms on the right hand side is
the "branching ratio" for a different mode of decay, which we represent with the letter f. A
branching ratio is just the probability that a decay will be of a specific type. As we can see,
the branching ratios must sum to one.

Now, we can finally start to solve some decay equations. Because we are primarily interested in
seeing how populations of radionuclides change over time, and because the rate at which these
populations change is related to the size of the populations themselves, we are going to need
to solve some differential equations. In this video, we won't need to use anything more advanced
than integrating factors, so don't be worried if you aren't super familiar with the techniques
used in this branch of mathematics.

The simplest example we can come up with here is a case where one isotope decays into another.
We will call the first isotope "X_1" and the second isotope "X_2", and X_1 has a decay constant
of lambda_1. We start by setting up the differential equations that describe the population of
these two isotopes. For X_1, dN_1/dt = -lambda_1 N_1(t). We do a little rearranging. We can solve
this first order linear ordinary differential equation with the help of an integrating factor,
which in this case is equal to e^lambda_1*t. We do a little calculus, and then solve for N_1(t).
Our final expression is N_1(t) = N_1(0)e^-lambda_1*t, classic exponential decay.

For X_2 we can also set up a differential equation. The change in the population of X_2 will have
two components. The population of X_2 will grow as X_1 decays away, and shrink as X_2 decays away,
so dN_2/dt will equal lambda_1*N_1(t)-lambda_2*N_2(t). Now in this example, X_2 is a stable isotope,
and it won't undergo decay, so lambda_2 equals zero. Now we have already solved for N_1(t), so we
substitute that in. And them we just integrate both sides with respect to time from - to t to get
our final result, after a little bit of rearranging. N_2(t) = N_2(0) + N_1(0)(1-e^-lambda_1*t).
The first term, N_2(0), is just the initial population of X_2. The second term represents the new
X_2 atoms that result from the decay of X_1.

Lets plot these populations and mess around with the parameters a bit to get some intuition here.
On the x-axis will be time, and on the right axis will be the number of each istope. Keep in mind
that the equations here are continuous functions, but decays occur discretely. So for small numbers
of isotopes (like 10), these curves will not be accurate, they should really look like a staircase.
For nearly all applications in nuclear engineering, the number of particles is so high that a
continuous function is acceptable. So you can imagine the y-axis as being in terms of moles.

The parameters available for us to perturb are X_1's decay constant and the initial populations of
the two istotopes. If we increase the decay constant, X_1 decays away faster, and X_2 builds up
quicker in turn. If we increase the initial amount of X_1, we can see that the final amount of X_2
that we end up with grows as well. Finally, if we increase the initial amount of X_2, there is no
impact on X_1.

Another interesting case we can solve for is the case where an unstable isotope is being produced
by some outside process. This could be something like the constant production of radioactive isotopes
within a cyclotron. The differential equation which describes this scenario is as follows. The change
in the population of X_1 is equal to -lambda_1*N_1(t) plus Q(t), so the first term on the righthand
side of the equation describes the decay of the X_1, and Q(t) is some arbitrary function which
describes the production of X_1 over time.

Now if we get the production term by itself on the right hand side of the equation, we end up with
something very similar to the decay equation we solved just a minute ago. Out integrating factor
is the same, at e^lambda_1*t, and if we multiple it into both sides and factor the lefthand side,
we get the following relationship. From here, its just a matter of integrating both sides from 0
to t. And then we solve for N_1(t). So this is our general formula which describes the population of
an undtable isotope which is also being produced by some outside process, and it's is valid for any
arbitrary production function. We still have an integral in the righthand side, so let's solve it
for the case where we are producing the isotope at a constant rate.

This is a pretty trivial integral to solve, and after a little bit of rearranging, we find that
N_1(t) = N_1(0)*e^(-lambda_1*t) + Q/\lambda_1 * (1 - e^(-lambda_1 t)). Notice that is the rate of
production was equal to zero, we would have the expression for an isotope decaying in isolation as
expected, so the first term represents the initial isotope population decaying away over time. The
second term represents the portion of X_1's population that is attributable to the outside production
as it builds up and decays away.

Now just like the last example, we will plot X_1's population and mess around with some of the
parameters to see how things shake out. Initally, we will set Q to zero, and you see that we get Our
familiar exponential decay curve. Adjusting lambda changes the rate of decay, as expected, and adjusting
N_1(0) changes the inital population like it did before. But when we change Q to be nonzero, we get
some interesting behavior.

Now that Q is positive and we are producing the isotope, we can see that the population doesn't approach
zero as time goes on, it approaches some other value. If we set t to infinity in the governing equation,
we can derive that this value is equal to Q/lambda_1. When the population of X_1 is equal to this, the
rate of X_1's decay will perfectly match the rate at which it is being produced. So we can say that as
t goes to infinity, X_1's activity will approach Q. This state, where the amount of an isotope remains
constant because it production and decay rates are equal is called "secular equilibrium".

The population will always approach the production rate over the decay constant, regardless of what values
we set our parameters to. So the magnitude of the inital population just determines whether or not we
approach Q/lambda from above or below. And the equilibrium population of our isotope is set by the magnitudes
of its production rate and decay constant.

Now that we have solved for some of these simple decay equations, lets move on and try and to get some
solutions to some more complicated setups.

When radioactive isotopes decay in the real world, there are often a great many steps that an unstable isotope
will make its way through in its journey to become stable. And along the way, there are often several different
pathways that can be taken with varying probablities. If you watched my first video on nuclear decay, you may
remember the decay chain that we walked through for Thorium-232. There were 10 decays that it needed to undergo
before it became Lead-208, and that was just the most likely path it could take. So the systems of differential
equations which govern real world decay can get pretty big, and that leads to a lot of complexity when we try
and solve them with the techniques we have used so far.

Just to give you a little taste of how bad things can get, I'll show you the equations that govern a two step
decay equation, where X_1 decays into X_2, which then decays into a stable X_3. So the system of differential
equations that governs this is as follows. The change in X_1's population is just -labmda_1*N_1(t). The amount
of X_2 grows with the decay of X_1 and decreases as X_2 decays, so dN_2/dt=lambda_1*N_1(t)-lambda_2*N_2(t), and
the amount of X_3 builds up with the decay of X_2, so dN_3/dt=lambda_2*N_2(t).

We already solved for the case of N_1(t), its just exponential decay. For N_2(t), the solution gets a little more
involved, as unlike the two-step decay chain from earlier, X_2 isn't stable here and will undergo decay with time.
We can still solve it with the help of an integrating factor though, and after a little calculus an algebra, we
get this slightly uglier expression. Feel free to pause the video here if you want to step through the derivation
yourself. The first term represents the original population of X_2 that decays away with time, and the second term
represents the population of X_2 resulting from the decay of X_1 which builds up and eventually decays away.

Now while the differential equation for N_3(t) looks nicer, solving it is actually even more tedious, so I won't talk
thorugh the math here, but its just using another application of an integrating factor to get to a solution. And you
can see that it is getting pretty messy here. But the first term is just the initial amount of X_3, which is stable
and doesn't decay away. The second term is the inital amount of X_2 that decays into N_3, and the final big term on
the second line is the initial amonut of X_1, which decays into X_2 and then X_3.

If we plot the populations of the three isotopes, we see that X_1 decays away, as expected. X_2 has a more complicated
behavior, as it will build up in the system as X_1 decays away, but then it must itself decay into X_3, which builds
up as t goes to infinity.

Changing the inital amount of X_1 alters the total amount of isotopes in the system which need to pass thorugh all three
states, so all three curves scale accordingly. Changing the inital amount of X_2 has no bearing on N_1(t), but it does
have downstream effects for the population of X_3 as a function of time. And changing the inital amount of X_3 just shifts
its curve alone, since it is stable.

All three curves are sensitive to the value of lambda_1, since it controls the rate at which X_1 decays into X_2, and thus
impacts the amount of X_2 available to decay into X_3 at all points in time. Changing lambda_2 doesn't impact N_1(t) at all,
but it does impact how quickly X_2 decays into X_3.

Something interesting happens if X_2 is much more unstable than X_1, which is to say, lambda_2 is much larger than lambda_1.
Here, we basically have a situation where the instant an atom of X_1 decays into X_2, that X_2 atom decays into X_3. This
means that we never really build up an appreciable population of X_2 in the system, it decays away too quickly. And the result
is that the curves for N_1(t) and N_3(t) effectively resemble those for the single-step decay chain we solved for earlier, it's
as if X_2 isn't even there.

In this case, if we plot the activities for X_1 and X_2 as a function of time (remember that activity just means the rate of
decay), we see that the activity for X_2 quickly jumps up to that of X_1 and follows it more or less exactly. This is a function
of the fact that because the decay constant of X_2 is much larger than that of X_1, we basically get an X_2 decay the instant
we have an X_1 decay. This state, where the activity of a daughter isotope matches the activity of its parent due to a difference
in their decay constants is called "transient equilibrium". If lambda_2 is closer to lambda_1, the decays do not occur in lock
step, so a population of X_2 can build up resulting in a mismatch of their activities.

These equations that we have been solving have a special name, they are bateman equations. They take on this familiar form,
where the value of each the functions increases as its parent function shrinks and decreases proportional to its own value.
For the special case where the initial populations of all isotopes except X_1 are zero, we can get a general solution to
the Bateman equations of this unsightly form. In practice, its really only worth going through the process of getting an
analytical solution to these equations for the cases we have analyzed today. Once things get more complicated than that, its
worth using some other mathematical techniques to get to a solution.

I'll close things out for this video by talking about the matrix exponential method, which we can use to solve more complicated
decay chains with the help of a computer. We have just seen just how nasty things get with a simple two-step decay chain, so you
can imagine how bad things would be if we added more steps, or allowed some isotopes to undergo different decay modes resulting
in forks in our decay chain. Just solving for a simple three step decay chain takes a couple pages of calculus and algebra.

The matrix exponential method works as follows. We start by writing out our bateman equations for the decay chain we are interested
in, and just to make things easy, we will do this for our two-step decay chain. So here are our bateman equations, they look the same
as before. And what we can do is write out all of the "hidden terms" here, where we will explicitly add terms to our equations which
mathematically link isotopes that actually have no bearing on each other. So for instance, the population of X_1 is in no way
dependent on the population of X_3, since it is downstream of it in the decay chain, but we can still write out a term that links X_1
to X_3, so long as the coefficient on N_3(t) is zero.

After writing out these expanded bateman equations, it becomes pretty clear that we can write this system of differential equations
in matrix form. Here, each row in the big matrix of coefficients corresponds to an equation for an individual isotope, and each column
sums to zero since the total population of isotopes doesn't change.

We can write this a little more succinctly as follows. Little n(t) will represent the vector of isotope populations, so the lefthand side
is just dn/dt. The matrix of decay constants we will write as big lambda, and the final vector is just n(t). The solution to this
differential equation of matrices will be as follows, where n(t) will be the matrix exponential of big lambda times t times the vector of
initial isotope populations.

Now the matrix exponential is something that we can solve with a computer through the following process. Recall that we can take the Taylor
expansion of e^x about x=0 as follows, it's equal to 1 + x + x^2/2! + x^3/3!, and so on. Well a similar expansion can be written for
e^Lanbda*t as follows, its the identity matrix with the same dimensions as lambda + Lambda*t + 1/2!*Lambda^2t^2 + 1/3!*Lambda^3t^3 and so on,
with the identity matrix just being a square matrix with ones on the diagonal and zeros in all other positions. This expansion would be a
nightmare to calculate by hand to any degree of accuracy, even for a trivial problem like this two step decay chain, but computers are
perfectly slated for this task. The solution to e^Lambda*t will give us a matrix of coefficients that, when multiplied with the vector of
initial isotope populations, will give us solutions for the populations of our isotopes in the decay chain.

So lets do an example for a more complicated decay chain. This is actually a problem that I had to solve in my first nuclear engineering
course that I took as an undergrad. Here is our decay chain, there are eight isotopes in total. X_1 decays into X_2 85% of the time, and
into X_3 15% of the time. X_2 decays into the stable X_4 40% of the time, and into the X_5 60% of the time. X_3 decays into X_5. X_5 decays
into X_6 and X_7 with branching ratios of 0.25 and 0.75, respectively. X_6 decays into X_7, and X_7 decays into the stable X_8.

The decay constants we will use are as follows, note that for X_4 and X_8 they are equal to zero, since they are stable and don't decay
into anything else. Here are the differential equations which describe this decay scheme, you can imagine that solving these analytically
would be a pretty ridiculous thing to do, so lets put this system of equations in matrix form.