Welcome back to The Fast Neutron! This is installment 2 in my ongoing series on the basics
of nuclear science and engineering. Today's video is all about nuclear decay.

If you haven't seen part 1, I have a link to it down in the description. We already went
over some of the fundamentals of atoms including what composes them, how we talk about them,
and the forces which hold them together. If you have seen the last video, thanks for coming
back!

The first item on the agenda is Q-values. This will be a quick section as they are a pretty
simple concept, but they are crucial to understand for all of the discussion that will follow.

After that, we will talk about radioactive decay, which is the mechanism by which unstable atoms
shed energy to assume more stable forms. We'll talk about the different types of decay, the particles
that they give off, and the energy distributions of those particles.

Finally, We are going to construct the chart of the nuclides, and use our newfound knowledge of nuclear
decay to vizualize some trends.

Alright, onto Q values.

You're here today to learn a little bit about nuclear decay. At its base level, nuclear decay is just
a set of processes by which nuclei pass energy around and change their structure to become more stable.
With this in mind, it would be pretty useful to have a quantity which could be used to characterize the nature of
these energy exchanges, so - how much energy is being passed around, is energy being consumed or released,
things of that nature. This is exactly what Q values convey.

For a nuclear reaction or decay event, the Q value is the change in energy between the initial state of
the system and the final state of the system. This change in energy is most commonly seen as a change in the
kinetic energy of the particles within a system. Now because of conservation of energy, we know that we
can't just have energy appear out of thin air, so where is the change in energy coming from?

Like we saw in our last video, energy and mass are just two sides of the same coin, so we can write an
energy balance for a system as follows. The final overall energy in the system has to be equal to the initial
overall energy in the system. Now there are really two types of energy that we need to look at here, and these
are the kinetic energies and rest mass energies of the particles participating in the reaction.

The initial overall energy of the system is just the kinetic energy of
all of the reaction precursors plus their rest mass energies, and the final overall energy of the system
is just the kinetic energy of the reaction products plus their rest mass energies. With a little rearranging, we can see that (through
conservation of energy) the change in the kinetic energy within the system comes from a change in the overall mass
within the system. So when a nuclear reaction or decay event occurs, a little bit of mass is being transformed
into energy, or vice versa.

So we sub in this relationship to our Q value formula, and we arrive at our final equation. The Q value for a
reaction is equal to negative delta M time c^2. Now notice that at no point in this derivation was there any
stipulation that Q has a certain sign. If the reaction's outputs have less mass than the reaction's inputs,
Q will be positive. In this case, we have an "exothermic reaction" which signals the release of energy. Some
mass is converted into energy which may be carried away by the reaction products as kinetic energy. You can
see an example below, here comes this slow moving particle towards the target and BAM! Energy is released
and the less massive products go zipping away.

If the mass of the reaction products exceeds the mass of the reaction precursors, Q will be negative. This is
the case for "endothermic" reactions, where some of the kinetic energy of the reaction inputs is converted into
mass. Here's an example of that, along comes the particle, and the more massive products move away with lower
kinetic energies.

Now for the sake of clarity, I did leave an important detail out here. The derivation that we followed assumed that
all of the reaction precursors and products were in their ground state. But through a variety of processes, it
is possible for nuclei to take on higher-energy "excited states", where the nucleus has a certain amount of
excess energy associated with it. Because of mass-energy equivalence, we can write the mass of an excited nucleus
as being equal to the nucleus's rest mass energy in the ground state plus its excitation energy over c^2. We use
an asterisk in our isotopic notation to indicate that a nucleus is excited. Keep this in mind for later, it will come
up again when we talk through gamma decay.

OK, with our new understanding of Q-values, lets move onto the subject of radioactive decay.

Put simply, radioactive decay is how atoms with too much energy transform themselves to take on more stable states.
To shed their excess energy, unstable atoms release particles which carry it away in the form of kinetic energy and
their rest mass energies. Now there are a number of different types of radioactive decay, in fact there are too many
to go in depth on all of them in this short video, but I'm gonna go over some of the major ones that make up the
majority of the common decay modes we see in the subatomic world.

First up is alpha decay. This type of decay is mostly seen in heavy unstable nuclei, typically those with mass numbers
well over 200. During alpha decay, the nucleus spits out an "alpha particle", which is just a helium-4 nucleus. Two
protons, two neutrons. So with this in mind, we can write out a generalized equation for what alpha decay looks like.
Our "parent" nuclide undergoes an alpha decay event, and we get a "daughter" nuclide which has a mass number four less
than the parent's and an atomic number two less than the parent, and an alpha particle. The Q-value, which is the
mass of the parent particle minus the mass of the daughter particles all time c^2, is therefore just the mass of nuclide
"X" minus the mass of nuclide "Y" minus the mass of an atom of helium-4, all times c^2. At first, it might seem weird that
we use the mass of helium-4 instead of the mass of an alpha particle, but we need to remember that although the daughter
nuclei has an atomic number two less than the parent, we don't destroy any electrons. If we were to use the mass of an alpha
particle instead of helium-4, we would have an inbalance of two electrons in this equation which would throw off our Q
value.

Lets look at an example of alpha decay in action. We start with an atom of Polonium-210, after it kicks off an alpha particle,
it is no longer polonium, but rather an atom of lead. Using the formula above, we can calculate the Q value for this reaction
by substituting in the appropriate mass values, and we arrive at a value of 5.4076 MeV being released by this decay.

Now an interesting question we could ask about alpha decay is "how is the energy released in the decay split between the
daughter nuclide and the alpha particle?" Well we can start to answer this question by setting up the conservation of
energy for the reaction. All of the Q value's energy will go into the kinetic energies of the daughter and the alpha, so
we arrive at the expression Q equals 1/2 the mass of the daughter times its velocity squared plus 1/2 the mass of the alpha
times its velocity squared. Now this equation alone isn't enough to answer our question, we have two unknowns here, the
daughter nuclide and the alpha could split the Q value in an infinite number of ways. But once we take into account conservation
of momentum, we can get a solution. So through conservation of momentum we know that the momentums of the reaciton products must
be equal to one another. If the decay event sends the alpha zipping off to the left, the daughter nuclide better be going to
the right. So the mass of the daughter nuclide times its velocity is equal to the mass of the alpha times its velocity.
  
I'll spare you the algebra, but if we solve this system of equations for the kinetic energies of the two particles, we get
the following expressions. The kinetic energy of the daughter nuclide is equal to the mass of the alpha over the sum of the
masses of the reactions products, all times the Q value. And the kinetic energy of the alpha is of the same form, just with
the mass of the daughter nuclide in the numerator. This is pure kinematics at work. Because there are just two reaction
products, there is exactly one energy each of them can take on. And because the alpha particle will always have a lower
mass than the daughter nuclide, it will end up leaving with most of the Q value.

So for our Polonium decay from earlier, this works out to the daughter nuclide carrying away just 0.1 MeV and the alpha particle
carrying away the remaining 5.3 MeV.

Something pretty interesting about alpha decay is that despite the fact that alphas are among the heaviest particles emitted
in decay events, their ability to penetrate matter is not very strong. Their large size and strong charge means they interact
very strongly with just about anything they come into contact with and dissipate their energy quickly. Just a couple of
centimeters of air or a single sheet of paper is enough to stop an alpha particle, and they wont penetrate more than a fraction
of a millimeter into human tissue.

Because of this, alpha emitters can be safe to touch, even with your bare hands. The outer layers of dead skin cells are
more than enough to stop alpha particles from damaging living tissue. A common misconception is that uranium metal is dangerous
to be near. This isn't the case because uranium primarily decays through alpha decay. With this being said, alpha emitters are
extremely dangerous if ingested. In this case, the alpha particles will deposit all of their energy directly into tissue.
Polonium-10, the isotope from earlier, is lethal if as little as one microgram is ingested, making it orders of mangitude more
dangerous than cyanide on a per-mass basis.

Next up is beta decay. Remember from the last video the binding energy of a nucleus is in part determined by the balance of
protons vs. neutrons. Where alpha decay allowed for nuclei with too many nucleons to shed energy, beta decay provides a path
for nuclei with too many protons vs. neutrons (or vice versa) a way to reach more stable states. Beta decay comes in two forms,
beta-plus and beta-minus, and we'll start with beta-minus.

Beta-minus decay is seen in atoms with too many neutrons. In beta-minus decay, a neutron is converted into a proton through a
process meadiated by the weak interaction, one of the four fundamental forces. Now a new positive charge has been created where
there wasn't one before, so to conserve charge, some of the energy of the decay goes into the creation of an electron which is
ejected from the particle. This electron is known as a "beta particle" in this process.

An additional particle called an electron antineutrino is also created in beta minus decay. Neutrinos are particles which interact
with only the weak force and gravity, and they have extremely small masses.

So we can write out a generalized equation for beta minus decay, where the parent nuclide decays into a daughter nuclide with the
same mass number (but one more proton) as well as an electron and an electron antineutrino. Lets look at a quick example of beta
minus decay.

So we start with an atom of Carbon-14, which has more neutrons than it would like to have. After it decays, we are left with an
atom of nitrogen-14, an electron, and an electron antineutrino. Lets write out a Q-value equation for this decay event.

Our Q value will just be the mass of carbon-14 minus the mass of nitrogen 14 minus the mass of an electron antineutrino. Now you might
be thinking that we left out the mass of the beta particle, but since a neutral atom of nitrogen has one more electron than a neutral
atom of carbon, the beta particle's mass is already included on the right hand side. So we plug in the masses to get the following
expression. The mass of the electron antineutrino is so small that we actually don't have a good measurement for it, just an
upper bound on what it *might* be, so for this reason we can ignore it. And we get a value of 156.5 keV.

So that's beta-minus decay. Now we will go through the process of calculating the energy carried away by the beta particle, but it is
a little more involved than the kinematics we used to solve for the alpha particle's energy, so I'll introduce beta-plus decay first
and we will come back to this in a minute.

Where beta minus decay helps nuclides with too many neutrons by converting a neutron into a proton, electron, and electron
antineutrino, beta-plus decay does just the opposite. For atoms with too many protons, beta-plus decay converts a proton into
a neutron, a positron, and an electron neutrino. So our generalized formula for beta-plus decay is as follows.

A positron is just the antimatter counterpart to an electron. It has the same mass and spin as an electron, but it has a charge of
positive one. Lets look at an example of beta-plus decay in action.

We start with an atom of magnesium-23, which has more protons than it would like. And after the beta plus decay we are left with
an atom of sodium-23, a position, and an electron neutrino. We can calculate the Q value in a very similar manner to that of the
beta minus example from earlier. One difference here though is that the mass of the positron is not included in the mass of the
daughter nuclide, since it has one fewer proton than the parent, so we need to account for that in the formula by subtracting
twice the mass of a positron. After a little math, we arrive at a Q value of just over 3 MeV.

OK, now lets go back and talk about how much energy beta particles take away from these decay events. With alpha decay, we were
left with two reaction products, so there is just one way that they could split the Q value to conserve energy and momentum. With
beta decay, we are left with three reaction products, so there are an infinite number of ways that they could divvy up energy to
to the same.

The beta particle could take away any amount of energy ranging from 0 eV to the entire Q value, but with the help of quantum mechanics,
we can calculate the probability distribution which governs the energy that the beta particle leaves with. It looks like this.

So this is a probability density function which represents the probablity per unit energy that the beta particle will have some kinetic
energy T-sub-e. The big C out front is a normalization constant. This is set such that when you integrate this expression over all energies
from 0 to Q, you get 1. The F(Z,T_e) is a non-relativistic Fermi function. This accounts for the fact that a beta minus particle will be
pulled in by the nucleus it is leaving due to electrostatic attraction, and the fact that a beta-plus particle will get an extra kick as
it leaves for the same reason.

The form of the Fermi function is as follows. F is approximated as 2 pi x over 1 minues e to the negative 2 pi x. And x is defined as minus
or plus the atomic number of the daughter nuclide time a jumbled mess of constants times 1 over beta. Now the notation is a bit confusing
because we are talking about beta decay, but the beta here comes from special relativity, its the velocity of the beta particle over the
speed of light. We set the minus plus term depending on the type of beta decay we are analyzing. If it is beta plus, we set it to minus.
If it is beta minus, we set it to plus.

Now this jumbled mess of constants I mentioned earlier - the square of the elementary charge over 4 pi times the permittivity of free space
times the reduced Plank's constant times c - that mess, it actually has a name, the fine structure constant, which we represent with alpha.
All of the units in this fraction cancel out, so the fine structure constant is just a number. It governs the coupling strength of elementary
charges to the electric field, and cool little physics easter egg is that the fine structure constant has a value very verrrry close (but
not exactly equal) to 1/137. Why 137? Well, nobody knows. The fine structure constant is just a fundamental constant, it is the way it is
because it is the way it is.

Alright, lets plot the energy distributions for a hypothetical beta plus and beta minus decay. On the x-axis, we have the beta energy,
and on the y-axis, we have our probability density function. Now you can see that for a beta-plus decay, its actually impossible for
the positron to leave the decay with zero energy. This is because of the kick it gets from the protons in the nucleus. For beta-minus
decay, it is possible for the electron to leave with zero energy, as the positively-charged nucleus pulls on the beta minus particle.
The distributions for both decay modes approach zero as the beta's energy gets closer to the Q-value. 

Now like alphas, it doesn't really take all that much to stop beta particles. Just a couple of centimeters of a material like plastic
is typically all that is required. Since betas are charged, they interact stongly with any matter they come into contact with and
quickly dissipate their energy. With this being said, we need to consider what's called "bremsstrahlung" radiation. "Bremsstrahlung"
is German for "braking radiation", it's secondary radiation emitted in the form of photons when beta particles slow down. Using
shielding materials with low atomic numbers can help to combat this, as the acceleration the beta particles experience while slowing
down will be reduced.

Finally, lets talk about gamma decay. Gamma decay is a pathway for nuclei with too much energy to reach a lower energy state through
the emission of a gamma particle, which is just a photon. Now unlike alpha and beta decay, gamma decay acts on excited nuclei and does
not transmute the parent nuclide. This means that there is no change in the parent's composition, it's a pure release of excess energy.
So the generalized equation for a gamma decay can be written as follows - remember that the asterisk means that a nucleus is in an
excited state.

An example of gamma decay in action can be seen below, where an excited atom of plutonium-240 jumps to its ground state and spits out
a photon. We can write out the Q value of this equation as follows. The mass of the excited nucleus is just the mass of the nucleus
in its ground state plus the excitation energy over c^2, so everything here cancels out and we find that the Q value for a gamma
decay is just equal to the excitation energy.

Almost all of the Q-value's energy is carried away by the photon. Photons are massless, but they do have momentum which the daughter
nuclide must conserve, but in practice the recoil energy of the daughter nuclide is typically so small that it is fair to say that
the energy of the photon is just the Q-value.

It is considerably more difficult to stop gammas than it is alphas or betas. A high energy photon has no problems punching through
most materials. The best gamma shielding materials are those with high atomic numbers, so heavy metals like lead are commonly used.
This is why lead aprons are used by medical professionals performing xrays, they need a high-Z material to protect themselves from
high energy photons.

Ok, now that we have learned about some of the most common forms of radioactive decay, I want to bring things home by constructing
the chart of the nuclides from scratch and using it to vizualize some trends on the ways that isotopes decay.

So first, lets set up our axes. On the x-axis, we will have the number of neutrons. And on the Y-axis, the number of protons.
This is pretty similar to the setup for the final plot from the last video, but instead of plotting the mass number we have the
number of neutrons. The information expressed is equivalent, though. Each 1x1 cell in this plot represents a unique isotope, so
lets fill the space with all isotopes that have data on.

Each row in this grid corresponds to an element, so for 26 protons we have iron. And for 92 protons, we have uranium. One thing
that is pretty interesting to notice is that the grid is pretty thin in the x direction for light elements and heavy elements,
and it gets much wider for elements closer to halfway up the periodic table. The reason for this is that the asymmetry term from
the binding energy equation in the semi-empirical mass formula is very dominant at low mass numbers. So for elements with low
atomic numbers, we cant support a very large imbalance in the number of protons and neutrons. Once we move up the grid to the
heaviest atoms, we get into some really unstable territory. The nuclei get very large and last only a short amount of time before
decaying, and there aren't that many isotopes supported for each superheavy element. In the middle of the grid's height, we have
elements which are heavy enough to support a reasonably big imbalance in protons vs. neutrons, but light enough to avoid some of
the decay modes that plague heavy elements.

Now obviously not all of these isotopes are stable, in fact, only a small portion of them are. I'm going to highlight them by
coloring them black. For each element, we can see that we typically only have a few stable isotopes. Once we move up past lead
with an atomic number of 82, there are actually no stable isotopes. The notion of stability here is in some sense pretty relative.
Some of the squares on this grid represent isotopes that only exist for fractions of a microsecond on average before they decay.
Others represent isotopes that are indeed unstable, but decay extremely slowly. As a matter of fact, it was long believed that bismuth,
with an atomic number one higher than lead's at 83, was the heaviest element with a stable istoope. But back in 2003, it was found
that bismuth-209, which was though to be stable, actually undergoes alpha decay at a rate so slow that its half life is longer than
the age of the universe. We'll get into half lifes in the next video, I just though that this was an interesting point to mention.

An interesting trend can be seen if we plot a line which tracks along all the isotopes with an equal number of protons and neutrons.
Isotopes above this line have more protons than neutrons, and isotopes below the line have more neutrons than protons. If we zoom
in on the lightest elements, we see that their stable isotopes pretty much all sit on this line. However, as we introduce more and
more protons into the mix, the "line of stability" as its called starts to deviate away from an even split of protons and neutrons,
and stable isotopes consistently have many more neutrons than protons. Once enough protons are in the mix, binding energy benefits
from having a surplus of neutrons to space out the protons and increase the number of strong interactions, and the penalty for having
an imbalance between the two species drops.

Now lets start to color this plot in with all of the unstable isotopes. First up, alpha decay, which we will color in with yellow.
Remember from earlier how we talked about alpha decay mostly affecting the heaviest isotopes, especially those with mass numbers
greater than 200. So we would expect for the portion of the grid near the top right to be home to lots of alpha emitters, and that
is what we see! For these heavy isotopes, kicking off a cluster of two protons and two neutrons is a great way to move toward the
line of stability.

There are a few proton-rich isotopes with around 50 protons which primarily undergo alpha decay, these are isotopes like Antimony 104
and Tellurium 105, which are pretty unusual.

Since we are in Tellurium's neighborhood, we can pay a visit to the longest-lived unstable isotope that we know of, Tellurium-128. Now
this isotope is unstable, it undergoes a very unusual double beta minus decay. But its half life is over 160 trillion times the age
of the universe. If you had an entire gram of tellurium 128, you could only expect to see a single atom decay every 674 years or so.

There actually are some of isotopes which may be more stable than this. There is a set of isotopes which are called "obeservationally
stable". Nuclear physics predicts them to be unstable, but we have never actually been able to measure them decaying in an experiment.

Perhaps the strangest alpha emitter is beryllium 8. By far the lightest alpha emitter, this little isotope lasts only a fraction of a
femtosecond on average before it spits out an alpha particle and becomes an atom of helium-4 itself. The fact that beryllium-8 is
unstable actually has some pretty important ramifications for stellar nucleosynthesis. The fact that such a light isotope with an even
split of protons and neutrons is unstable leads to a sort of bottleneck in the production of heavier isotopes within stars. If the fine
structure constant was just slightly different, it would be possible for beryllium-8 to be stable. In this case, the missing bottleneck
would have a considerable impact on the abundance of heavy isotopes in our universe.

Alright, now lets talk beta plus decay, which I will color in pink. There is actually another similar decay mode called electron capture
which I am going to bundle in here. Electron capture sees an atom basically "eat" one of its inner-shell electrons and convert a proton
into a neutron to conserve charge. The daughter nuclide for electron capture is the same as for beta plus decay and we still see the
emission of a neutrino, but we don't emit a positron. Any atom that can undergo electron capture can also undergo beta-plus decay, so
we will just bin them together.

Now beta-plus decay involves swapping a proton for a neutron, so this would move us one space to the right and one space down on our
grid. For this reason, we should expect to see lots of beta-plus emitters in the upper portions of the grid, as moving down and to the
right would bring us closer to to the line of stability. And that's exactly what we see!

Beta-minus decay is more or less just the inverse, I'll color it in blue. Here, we swap a neutron for a proton, so we will move one
space up and one space to the left on our grid. For this reason, we expect many isotopes below the line of stability to decay through
the emission of an electron, and that is exactly what we see.

The only other decay mode we analyzed earlier that we haven't mentioned is gamma decay, but remember that gamma decay doesn't change
the composition of the parent nuclide, just it's energy. So gamma decay doesn't actually move us anywhere on this plot.

Now there are a few scattered spaces in this chart which still haven't been filled in. These are some more exotic decay forms that,
for the sake of time, I didn't go into detail on in this video. The first up is proton decay, where a proton is ejected from the nucleus,
simple as that. I'll color it in orange. Proton decay is typically seen in very unstable proton rich nuclei with lower atomic numbers.

Next up is neutron decay, where a neutron is ejected from the nucleus. I'll color it in purple. Neutron decay is seem in some neutron-rich
nuclei with low mass numbers.

Finally, some heavy isotopes are capable of spontaneously undergoing nuclear fission as a decay mode. Californium-252 is a famous example
here. Normally, it descays thorugh alpha emission, but around 3% of the time, it descays through spontaneous fission. This has made it
useful as a startup source in nuclear reactors.

To close this out, lets quickly walk through a decay chain to show how an unstable isotope progressively transmutes itself to reach a
stable state. Just as an example, we'll start with an atom of thorium-232. This undergoes alpha decay, losing two protons and two
neutrons, so we move two spaces down and two spaces to the left to radium-228. This undergoes beta minus decay, swapping a neutron
for a proton, so we move one space up and one space to the left. Now we have actinium-228, which beta minus decays to thorium-228.
This kicks off a chain of alpha decays that takes us to Radium-224, then Radon-220, then polonium-216, then lead-212. This beta minus
decays to bismuth-212, which beta minus decays to polonium-212. And one last alpha decay brings us to lead-208, which is stable.

Every location on this chart that isn't on the line of stability has its own path it can take to reach a stable state. And there you
have it! The chart of the nuclides. I hope that the trends here make sense to you, and that you have a newfound understanding of some
of the ways that unstable nuclei shed energy.

Thanks for watching. for the next video I'm going to  a part 2 on nuclear decay, where we will go over the equations that govern
decay and the math behind radioactivity. Hope to see you there!