Welcome back to The Fast Neutron! Today's video is going to be a shorter one, we are going
to be introducing binary nuclear reactions. We are coming off the back end of a two part
series on nuclear decay, if you haven't seen those videos, I would recommend you check them
out. They definitely aren't necessary viewing to understand what we are going to talk about
today, but as we work our way through the basics of nuclear science and engineering, the
concept of nuclear decay will definitely come up a few more times.

The reason I want to introduce binary nuclear reactions today is that some of the formulas
which describe neutron scattering have their basis in the equations we will come up with
today, and neutron scattering is one of the most important phenomena in all of nuclear
engineering.

To start things off, we will begin by introducing what a binary nuclear reaction actually is.
From there, we will see that there are a couple of energetic thresholds associated with binary
nuclear reactions, the first of which is the kinematic threshold, and the other of which is the
Coulombic threshold. Alright, without further ado, let's get into binary nuclear reactions.
 
All across the subatomic world, particles are undergoing collisions. Particles can interact to
produce multiple reaction products through a variety of different modes, but today we are going
to talk through the mechanics of a specific family of reactions which is incredibly important,
binary nuclear reactions.

Put simply, a binary nuclear reaction is any interaction between two nuclei which produces one
or more reaction products. Today, we will specifically be focusing on the case where there are
exactly two reaction products. Crucially, we will assume that all participants in these reactions
are non-relativistic, so the calculations we will due will be more or less entirely classical.

If we write out the general equation which descrives binary nuclear reactions, we get the following.
Little x we call the "projectile", big X is the "target", and when it comes to the products, we get
big Y and little Y, which are the heavy and light products.

Now because we are only going to be discussing non-relativistic reactions in this video, the kinetic
energy of the projectile will generally be on the order of a few MeV or less. When this is the case,
reactions actually support the brief creation of a short-lived excited "compound" nucleus, which quickly
spits out the reaction products. Because this compound nucleus is doesn't last very long at all, we
typically leave it out of our expressions.

Something interesting about these nuclear processes is that the compound nucleus has no "memory" of
how it came to be. And a result of this is that it will spit out the same daughter products regardless
of what projectile and target actually created it, for a given amount of total energy.

Just as a quick refresher, there is a shorthand we can use to write out these sorts of nuclear
reactions, we often write reactions out using parentheses, where the projectile and the light
product is on the inside, and the target and the heavy product are on the outside.

Now that we have an understanding of what these reactions acutally are, lets see if we can get some
intuition as to the energies that the products can carry away. Since we are at the scale of individual
nuclei, nucleons, and particles, quantum mechanics comes into play here. A consequence of that is that
the outgoing angles of the reaction products are fundamentally random. Binary nuclear reactions still
need to satisfy conservation of energy and momentum, though, so while we can't use classical mechanics
to tell what angle the reaction products will leave with, we can predict the energies that they will
have - given some angle. Lets analyze a binary nuclear reaciton with conservation of energy and
momentum, then.

So here we have our archetypal binary nuclear reaction, and we will label the angle between the light
product's path and the path of the projectile as theta. Each of the reaction participants will have
its own mass associated with it, which we will denote with m sub little or big X or Y.
Conservation of energy maintains that the energy of the reaction precursors must equal the energy of
the products, and if we set up the reaction such that the target is at rest in our frame of reference,
we get the expression E_x = E_y + E_Y + Q. Q is the Q value of the reaction, which we discussed at
length in a past video, and it captures the release or consumption of energy by the reaction.

The expression for conservation of momentum is a little more complicated, but if the target is at rest
in our reference frame, we can say with certainty that through conservation of linear momentum, if the
projectile is traveling in the positive x direction, the sum of the x-components of the reaction products'
momenta must equal the projectile's momentum. So we can set up a nice little diagram like so to illustrate
this, and using the law of cosines on this triangle provides the following expression.

Now with these two formulas, we can get an equation which solves for the outgoing energy of the light
product as a function of its outgoing angle. The square root of the outgoing energy is this A term plus
or minus the square root of A squared plus B. The A and B terms are functions of the particle masses, the
projectile energy, the light product's outgoing angle, and the Q value.

With this formula in our toolbox, lets analyze a couple of potential outcomes of a binary nuclear reaction
in terms of the light product's energy.

First, lets consider the case where we have an exothermic reaction, which means that there is energy being
released by our nuclear process and the Q value is positive. By inspection, we can see that the A term has to be
positive. If Q is positive, B also has to be positive, since the heavy product must be heavier than the projectile.
Because of this, the term with the square root must be larger than A. So if we were to evaluate our expression
for E sub little y with a minus sign, we would get that the right hand side of the equation is negative.
This indicates that there is only one allowable energy for the light product, and that is the result of evaluating
our expression with a plus sign. For the case where the projectile is coming in with very little energy, we find
that the energy of the light product is simply the mass of the heavy product divided by the sum of the product
masses, all times Q.

Notice that this is the same exact expression we got for the energy of an alpha particle following alpha decay!
This makes sense, as a binary nuclear reaction with a target energy of close to zero is analogous to a decay 
event where an unstable atom spits out a reaction product. This is pure kinematics at work.

Now lets consider the case where we have an endothermic reaction, where we actually need to put energy in in order
to get the reation to occur. Here, it is possible that B is either positive or negative, depending on the magnitude
of Q and the projectile's energy. Because of this, it is then possible for the term under the radical - a^2+b, to be
negative. This indicates a threshold energy for the projectile, below which the reaction cannot take place.

If we meet this threshold energy, A plus the square root of a^2+b will be positive, signifying a solution to our equation.
And should the projectile's energy be large enough, it is also possible for A minus the square root of a^2+b to be positive.
This means that for endothermic reactions, there can actually be two possible outgoing energies for the light product,
provided that this energetic threshold is met.

This threshold that we have been dicussing has a name, the kinematic threshold. It is the minimum amount of projectile
energy needed to physically cause a nuclear reaction to occur. For exothermic reactions, this threshold is equal to
zero. After all, an exothermic reaction will release energy - the products will have lower rest mass energies than the
precursors and it is energetically prefereable for it to occur. For endothermic reactions, we need to put in energy
to get the reaction to occur.

We can calculate the magnitude of the kinematic threshold for an endothermic reaction by seeing what projectile energy
will just make it so that a^2+b is positive (or rather, equal to zero). I won't talk through the algebra to solve for
this in detail, but I'll quickly show it on the screen. We just plug in our definitions for A and B, and set theta to
zero, since that is when the threshold energy will be the lowest.

So then there is just a whole bunch of algebra... and a lot more algebra... and we arrive at the following expression.
Now for reactions where the Q value is small relative to the rest mass energies of the reaction participants, the
numerator here (which is the sum of the product masses) is approximately equal to the sum of the precursor masses, and
the denominator is the masses of the products minus the projectile mass, which is approximately equal to the target mass.
So the kinematic threshold can be approximated as the negative of the Q value times the quantity of one plus the ratio
of the projectile mass to the target mass.

There exists another threshold that needs to be overcome for a reaction to take place. Imagine a situation where a proton
is our projectile, and our target is a nucleus. Because both of our reaction participants are positively charged, they will
exert a repulsive electrostatic force upon one another. This acts as a barrier to the reaction taking place, and if the
proton's kinetic energy is very low, it will simply be repelled away - even if the reaction it was going to cause has a
positive Q value. To actually get this reaction to occur, the proton needs enough energy to overcome the "Coulomb threshold".

The magnitude of this threshold is equal to the electrostatic potential energy repelling the two reaction participants. Let's
write out an equation for the potential energy when the particles are just touching one another. We will symbolize this energy
with the letter V. The potential energy is equal to one over 4 Pi Epsilon naught, thats just the coulomb constant, times the
charges of the two particles multiplied together, which we can express as Z little x times E, times Z big X times E (where E
is the elementary charge), all over the distance between the two particles.

The distance between the particles is just the sum of their radii, assuming that they are just barely touching. In femtometers,
this is approximately equal to 1.2 times the sum of the cube roots of their mass numbers. If you remember back to the first
video I made on this channel, the liquid drop model holds that the radius of a nucleus grows with the cube root of the mass number.

If the projectile has at least this much kinetic energy, it will be able to overcome electrostatic repulsion and get close enough
to the target that the reaction may be able to occur, provided that the kinematic threshold is also overcome. One thing to note here
is that the energy which is passed to the electrostatic field is not lost, if the reaction occurs we get that energy back through
conservation of energy.

The overall threshold for a nuclear reaction to occur is just the maximum of these two thresholds. To close things out, lets do a
quick example to calculate the threshold energy for a real nuclear reaction.

Lets take an alpha particle and fire it at an atom of chlorine-35. Once this particular reaction is finished, we will get an atom of
potassium-38 and a neutron. First, we will calculate the kinematic threshold.

This reaciton has a Q value of -5.86 MeV, meaning it is endothermic and the kinematic threshold will be positive. We plug in the masses
of our reaction participants into the expression we derived earlier to find that the kinematic threshold is 6.49 MeV. So we will need an
alpha particle with at least this much energy to get things going.

Now we calculate the Coulomb threshold. Both the alpha particle and the chlorine nucleus have a positive charge, so there will be a nonzero
value for the columnb threshold. We plug in our charges to our equation, and our crude formula here returns a value of 8.40 MeV. The overall
threshold energy is therefore the maximum of the two thresholds, which is this case is the coulomb threshold of 8.40 MeV.

Thanks for watching! In the next video, we are going to be working through analyzing a reaction that is particularly important to
nuclear reactors, neutron scattering. Hope to see you there!

